City Research Online
City St George’s, University of London

Citation: Aversa, P. & Ihrig, M. (2012). Investigating Absorptive Capacity
Strategies via Simulation. Paper presented at the 26th European Conference on
Modelling and Simulation ECMS 2012, May 29th – June 1st , 2012, Koblenz,
Germany.
This is the accepted version of the paper.
This version of the publication may differ from the final published version. To cite
this item please consult the publisher's version.

Permanent repository link: https://openaccess.city.ac.uk/id/eprint/16269/

Copyright and Reuse: Copyright and Moral Rights remain with the author(s) and/or
copyright holders. Copies of full items can be used for personal research or study,
educational, or not-for-profit purposes without prior permission or charge, unless otherwise
indicated, provided that the authors, title and full bibliographic details are credited, a
hyperlink and/or URL is given for the original metadata page and the content is not changed
in any way. For full details of reuse please refer to City Research Online policy.
City Research Online:

http://openaccess.city.ac.uk/

publications@citystgeorges.ac.uk

INVESTIGATING ABSORPTIVE CAPACITY
STRATEGIES VIA SIMULATION
Paolo Aversa
Martin Ihrig
The Sol C. Snider Entrepreneurial Research Center
The Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania
Vance Hall 4th Floor, 3733 Spruce Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA

KEYWORDS
Agent-based simulation, absorptive capacity, strategic
management, organizational learning, knowledge, ISpace, SimISpace2, performance.
ABSTRACT
Absorptive capacity, defined as the organizational
capability to identify, absorb and exploit knowledge, is
one of the most discussed topics in the management
literature. Yet, its complex nature makes it almost
impossible to empirically test it. This paper develops
SimAC, an agent-based simulation tool that enables
studying and comparing different absorptive capacity
strategies, their related financial payoffs, and their
knowledge creation potential through time.
INTRODUCTION
Absorptive capacity (Cohen and Levinthal, 1990) –
hereafter AC—is one of the most discussed and
advanced concepts in management theory, and still one
of the less empirically tested (Lane, Koka and Pathak,
2006). Absorptive capacity is traditionally defined as
the organizational capability to identify relevant
external knowledge, assimilate it and exploit it for
commercial ends (Cohen & Levinthal, 1990: 128).
Although scholars have advanced complex and detailed
theoretical models about organizational skills in
knowledge identification, absorption, and exploitation
(Lane et al., 2006; Todorova and Durisin, 2007; Zahra
and George, 2002), empirical studies that test the entire
AC process are rare, partial, and sometimes misleading.
The reason is that knowledge acquisition involves
several intervening variables that could be frustratingly
difficult to retrieve and observe (Lim, 2009).
Furthermore, the abstract nature of knowledge does not
allow a direct observation of the phenomenon, forcing
scholars to identify proxies to measure AC development.
Knowledge is an intangible asset, which has distinctive
characteristics when compared to physical assets. For
this reason, in order to deeply understand the processes
underpinning AC, research needs to be grounded in a
solid theory of knowledge evolution.
In this paper, we aim to improve the understanding of
diverse AC strategies by developing SimAC, a
simulation model, which helps scholars to study the
effect of diverse approaches to organizational learning
on firm performance. Our work is based on SimISpace2,
Proceedings 26th European Conference on Modelling and
Simulation ©ECMS Klaus G. Troitzsch, Michael Möhring,
Ulf Lotzmann (Editors)
ISBN: 978-0-9564944-4-3 / ISBN: 978-0-9564944-5-0 (CD)

an agent-based graphical simulation environment
designed to model strategic knowledge management
processes, in particular knowledge flows and
knowledge-based agent interactions. The simulation is
based on Max Boisot’s Information Space (or I-Space),
a conceptual framework, which helps analyze
knowledge flows in populations of agents (Boisot, 1995,
1998). Within the I-Space framework, the Social
Learning Cycle provides a process interpretation of the
dynamic evolution of knowledge, its structuring, and
sharing. The process interpretation of organizational
learning and its sub-phases makes the I-Space a suitable
framework to advance the understanding of AC
strategies (Aversa, 2011).
ABSORPTIVE CAPACITY STRATEGIES
According to the traditional definition of AC by Cohen
and Levinthal (1990) and the more recent
reconceptualization by Zahra and George (2002), AC
can be summarized into a four-step process. In the first
phase, the organization identifies bundles of external
useful knowledge to acquire. The knowledge identified
is usually very concrete, and embodied in artifacts that
belong to other agents, or more in general to the
external environment. Once identified and acquired,
knowledge must be structured in order to be replicable
and exploitable. Firms transform the practical and tacit
knowledge embodied in the artifacts (e.g. products,
technologies, machineries) into abstract and codified
knowledge (e.g. formulas, scientific and technical
principles etc.): the more structured knowledge is, the
easier it becomes to share and exploit (Boisot, 1998;
Nonaka, 1994). In the third phase, structured knowledge
is diffused among the members of the organization and
embedded in concrete practices aimed at develop
artifacts, organizational rules, procedures and
behavioral patterns (impact phase). The organization
economically exploits the new knowledge, creating and
commercializing new products, services, and knowledge
assets. Therefore, according to the social learning cycle
concept (Boisot, 1998), knowledge completes a full
“cycle”, since firms obtain it in an unstructured form,
they structure it and then exploit it by embedding it in
products, processes and artifacts. AC leads to superior
performance and competitive advantage. To protect
their competitive advantage, organizations can patent
the knowledge they possess. However, while firms that
have superior skills only in knowledge acquisition and
transformation (called potential AC) obtain only part of

the benefits, firms skilled in knowledge development
and exploitation (called realized AC) are able to
maximize their economic performance and develop, in a
complete form, the entire AC potential (Jansen, Van den
Bosch and Volberda, 2005; Zahra and George, 2002).
Literature shows that companies need different types of
knowledge to develop innovation and increase
performance. In this paper we follow the Lim (2009:
1252)
three-type
knowledge
classification,
complementing it with a fourth group we consider
important: (1) Disciplinary knowledge, such as general
scientific knowledge; (2) Domain Specific Knowledge,
such as solutions specific to technical projects; (3)
Encoded knowledge, such as knowledge embedded in
tools and processes, and (4) Market knowledge, such as
knowledge about commercial opportunities and market
characteristics. Firms can concentrate on acquiring
particular types of knowledge assets, for example
focusing their investments on one kind, or on a mix of
two or more. For this study, we decided to test the
impact of five different types of AC strategies on
financial performance. We simulated the competitive
behavior of five different agent groups, each pursuing
one specific AC strategy:
− Agent group 1 - Research Firm: These kinds of
agents focus their AC strategy on scanning
knowledge;
− Agent group 2 - Managerial Firm: These kinds of
agents focus their AC strategy on abstracting
knowledge;
− Agent group 3 - Manufacturing Firm: These kinds
of agents focus their AC strategy on impacting
knowledge;
− Agent group 4 - Marketing Firm: These kinds of
agents focus their AC strategy on exploiting
knowledge.
− Agent group 5 – Balanced Firm: These kinds of
agents focus their AC strategy on pursuing a
balanced mix of all the possible actions.
In addition, every agent group can protect the
knowledge possessed via patenting.
According to our theoretical premises, our
parameterization will distinguish between the different
strategies in the simulation environment, and thus
enables us to dynamically analyze micro and macro
effects of AC strategies on firm performance. In
particular, we are interested in comparing the payoffs of
the five AC strategies. We expect to determine
distinctive knowledge evolution and financial
performance profiles for each firm (agent) type.
USING SIMISPACE2 TO MODEL AC
STRATEGIES
SimISpace2 is an agent-based graphical simulation
environment designed to simulate strategic knowledge
management processes, in particular knowledge flows
and knowledge-based agent interactions. The simulation
engine’s conceptual foundation is provided by Boisot’s
I-Space (1995, 1998). Recent studies have used the

SimISpace2 simulation suite to investigate knowledge
evolution in complex systems (Ihrig, MacMillan,
Knyphausen-Aufsess and Boisot, 2010).
Basic Parameterization of SimISpace2
Ihrig and Abrahams (2007) offer a rich and detailed
description of the structure and technicalities of the
SimISpace2 simulation environment. Due to the wide
set of modeling opportunities that this suite offers, we
will limit our description to the set of features that will
be used for our purposes. However, for readers that are
not familiar with this simulation framework, we will
briefly introduce some of the main SimISpace2
principles, paying attention to the way knowledge is
represented and processed by the agents. The following
description is adapted from Ihrig (2010):
Two major forms of entities can be modeled with
SimISpace2: agents and knowledge items/assets. When
setting up the simulation, the user defines agent groups
and knowledge groups with distinct properties.
Individually definable distributions can be assigned to
each property of each group (uniform, normal,
triangular, exponential, or constant distribution). The
simulation then assigns to the individual group members
(agents and knowledge items) characteristics in
accordance with the group they belong. Knowledge in
the simulation environment is represented through
knowledge items. Based on the knowledge group they
belong to, those knowledge items have certain
characteristics. All knowledge items together make up
the knowledge ocean: a global pool of knowledge.
Agents can access the knowledge ocean, pick up
knowledge items, and deposit them in knowledge stores
through the scanning action. A knowledge store is an
agent’s personal storage place for a knowledge item.
Each knowledge store is local to an agent, i.e. possessed
by a single agent. As containers, knowledge stores hold
knowledge items as their contents. Stores and their
items together constitute knowledge assets. Examples of
knowledge stores include books, files, tools, diskettes,
and sections of a person’s brain. There is only one
knowledge item per knowledge store, i.e. each
knowledge item that an agent possesses has its own
knowledge store. If an agent gets a new knowledge item
(whether directly from the knowledge ocean or from
other agents’ knowledge stores), a new knowledge store
for that item is generated to hold it.
The concept of a knowledge item has been separated
from the concept of a knowledge store to render
knowledge traceable. If knowledge items are drawn
from a common pool and stored in the knowledge stores
of different agents, it becomes possible to see when two
(or more) agents possess the same knowledge, a useful
property for tracking the diffusion of knowledge. The
separation between a global pool of knowledge items
and local knowledge stores is particularly important
when agents structure knowledge (which only applies to
knowledge stores, not to knowledge items). Multiple
agents hold knowledge items, and one agent’s
investment in structuring knowledge does not influence

the codification and abstraction level of the same
knowledge item held by another agent. Agents possess
knowledge stores that can have different degrees of
structure. If the agent structures its knowledge, the
properties of the knowledge item itself – i.e., its
contents – are not changed, but it gets moved to a new
knowledge store with higher degrees of structure – i.e.,
its form changes.
SimISpace2 also features a special kind of knowledge.
A DTI (knowledge Discovered Through Investment) is a
composite knowledge item that is discovered by
integrating the knowledge items that make it up into a
coherent pattern. DTIs cannot be discovered through
scanning from the global pool of knowledge items. The
user determines knowledge items to act as the
constituent components of a DTI. The only way for an
agent to discover a DTI is to successfully scan and
appropriate its constituent components and then
structure them beyond user-specified threshold values
in order to achieve the required level of integration and
abstraction. Once these values are reached, the agent
automatically obtains the DTI (the discover occurrence
is triggered in the simulation). Investing in its
constituent components – i.e. scanning and abstracting
them – is the primary means of discovering a DTI. By
specifying the values of different DTIs, the user can
indirectly determine the values of the networks of
knowledge items that produce DTIs. Such networks
represent more complex forms of knowledge. Once an
agent has discovered a DTI item, it is treated like a
regular knowledge item, i.e. other agents are then able
to scan it from the agent that possesses it.
Specific SimISpace2 Parameterization to Model AC
Strategies
Similar to Ihrig (2010) we decided to keep our model as
parsimonious as possible, thus using only six out of the
twenty actions available in the SimISpace2 suite: 1.
Scan, 2. Abstract, 3. Impact, 4. Learn, 5. Exploit, and 6.
Patent. Each agent’s goal is to scan knowledge items
(either from the ocean or from others), abstracting the
new knowledge (which correspond to structuring it).
Once knowledge has reached a certain level of structure,
it is diffused in practices and routines among and across
the organization (impact), and absorbed within the
organization (learn). Through the commercialization of
products and services developed based on the newly
acquired knowledge assets, the agent exploits the
knowledge potential, and thus increases its financial
performance. Simply put, superior capabilities in
managing this process of knowledge development and
exploitation correspond to higher AC. Higher levels of
AC lead to superior financial funds. The higher the
financial funds obtained following a specific AC
strategy, the more successful we will consider that
specific AC strategy.
Within the SimISpace2 environment we use specific
actions to model the agent groups’ focus on a particular
set of learning strategies AG1: Research firm (scanning
from the ocean and from others); AG2: Managerial firm

(abstracting); AG3: Manufacturing firm (impacting and
learning); AG4: Marketing firm (exploiting); AG5:
Balanced firm (an distributed mix of all the actions). In
addition, all the AGs have an equal propensity to protect
their knowledge through patenting. An agent can patent
knowledge for a certain duration and with a specific
strength. The agent can patent only the knowledge it
possesses, and only if it holds the knowledge in a
knowledge store that has an abstraction level above a
user set-level. In other words, patenting is valid only if
performed after abstraction. Also, when the knowledge
is possessed by a user-set number of other agents, it
becomes public domain and it cannot be patented. In our
simulation, the patent protection lasts for the entire
2,000 rounds, and has a strength of 0.5, which means
that the patented knowledge has a likelihood of 50% to
be effectively protected. Our patent abstraction
threshold has a value of 0, which means that any kind of
knowledge can be patented. Finally, when all the 50
agents possess a specific knowledge item, nobody can
patent it as we consider it “public domain.”
In order to compete in the market, each firm needs to
have at least a minimum propensity in pursuing each
type of these actions, which are mandatory for any kind
of innovation development. Yet, as mentioned above,
focusing on specific sets of actions corresponds to
different AC strategies.
We have also created four groups of knowledge items,
corresponding to the classification we previously
explained. For each group we assigned a base value of
20 and an abstraction and codification increment of 0.1.
Also, for each knowledge group we assigned a starting
value of codification and abstraction. The more
structured knowledge is, the higher will be the
codification and abstraction level we assigned.
− Knowledge group 1: Disciplinary knowledge
Codification: 1.0
Abstraction: 1.0
− Knowledge group 2: Domain specific knowledge
Codification: 0.8
Abstraction: 0.8
− Knowledge group 3: Encoded knowledge
Codification: 0.5
Abstraction: 0.5
− Knowledge group 4: Market knowledge
Codification: 0.3
Abstraction: 0.3
To develop innovations, firms need to acquire all four
types of knowledge items. To simulate this knowledge
acquisition, development, and exploitation scenario, we
have given a fixed budget of 9 “chips” to each agent per
round. The nine chips correspond to the different
activities that each agent can theoretically pursue in
each round, in order to develop innovation. The chips
are distributed based on the actions that define their
learning strategy. One of these chips is dedicated to
patenting their knowledge. For example, overall
research firms will spend 5 chips out of 9 in scanning,
because their strategy is focused on that kind of activity.
The remaining 3 chips are equally distributed for the

other actions, and 1 chip will be used for patenting.
Table 1 shows the resource distribution for each agent
group.
Table 1: Parameterization of the 5 strategies
AG 1. AG 2. AG 3.

AG 4.

AG5.

Balanced
Firm

Manufacturing
Firm

Marketing
Firm

1.0
1.0
2.5
2.5
1.0
1.0
9.0

1.0
1.0
0.5
0.5
5.0
1.0
9.0

Research
Firm

Managerial
Firm

2.0
5.0
1.0
2.0
1.0
5.0
3.Impact
1.0
0.5
0.5
Learn
1.0
0.5
0.5
4.Exploit
2.0
1.0
1.0
5.Patent
1.0
1.0
1.0
Total
9.0
9.0
9.0
*From the ocean and from others.
2.Abstract

Table 2: Knowledge items and DTIs in SimAC

Domain-Specific
Knowledge
Encoded
Knowledge

Scientific DTI
(First order
DTI)

Property Value - Financial Funds
AVERAGE of sim runs
SUM of agent group
1400000
Manufacturing firm
Managerial firm
Balanced firm
Marketing firm

1200000

1000000

For each round, the agents perform their actions in
knowledge acquisition, transformation, and exploitation.
The agents gain a DTI, the knowledge we model
innovation with, when they obtain a specific set of
knowledge items. Agents increase their financial funds
by capitalizing on the knowledge they possess,
especially DTIs. The financial funds accumulated by an
agent are the measure of its performance and success.
Agents with financial funds of zero die.
Following the definition of potential and realized AC
(Zahra and George, 2002), we developed two different
kinds of DTIs: scientific DTI and technical DTI. The
scientific DTI represents the potential AC (i.e. abstract
knowledge, that has no practical application yet), and
agents obtain it when they get a scientific knowledge
item plus a managerial knowledge item. The technical
DTI, which leads to higher financial return than the
scientific one, represents the realized AC (i.e. concrete
and applied knowledge), and agents obtain it when they
get a scientific DTI plus a manufacturing knowledge
item and a market knowledge item. Table 2 describes
the knowledge items needed for agents to collect DTIs.

Disciplinary
Knowledge

Simulating Financial Performance with SimAC
The first graph we present (Figure 1) shows the
different financial performance profiles measured in
funds accumulation, derived from the five different
strategies. Based on distinct AC strategies of the five
firm types, we can clearly distinguish five different
groups.

Technical DTI
(Second order
DTI)

Market
Knowledge

SIMULATION AND RESULTS WITH SIMAC
We have conducted SimISpace2 virtual experiments
with the SimAC model, aimed at exploring the impact of
different AC strategies on firm performance. We ran the
simulation 20 times, and each run lasted 2000 periods.
We created 10 participants for each of the five agent
groups (50 agents in total) and 10 knowledge items per

Financial Funds

Action
1.Scan*

type (40 knowledge times in total). All graphs show the
average across all runs.

800000

600000

400000

Research firm

200000

0
0

500

1000

1500

2000

2500

Period

Figure 1: Financial Funds (Longitudinal Report)
Insight 1: The financial performance of the five AC
strategies – research, managerial, manufacturing,
marketing, and balanced – will have distinct profiles, as
a result of the differences in their knowledge
appropriation and knowledge development behaviors.
The SimAC results are consistent with management
theory. Research firms are strongly dedicated to
knowledge identification and scanning, and therefore
are not able to exploit the commercial value of their
knowledge. Marketing firms, on the contrary, are
mainly dedicated to knowledge exploitation (exploit
activity set to five), but do not widely develop the first
phases of AC processes. As a result in the long run they
perform as the second worst, despite being the best
performing AG for the first 1750 periods. At the end,
the manufacturing firms, which focus on impacting and
learning, are the best performers of all the groups.
All of this highlights distinct simulation and modeling
capabilities of SimAC, which can be summarized as
follows.
Simulation & Modeling Capability 1: SimAC enables
simulating the different AC strategies and their
respective financial payoffs for different agent groups.
Simulating Potential AC with SimAC
The first insight shed light on the impact of strategies on
financial performance. However, money is not the only
way to measure the outcomes of organizational learning.
Innovation is also an important aspect that we have to
take into consideration in this context. Innovation
performance in SimAC is measured via the
accumulation of DTIs. The first type of DTI is the

scientific DTI, which stands for the potential AC (Zahra
and George, 2002). This kind of DTI corresponds to
possessing and combining disciplinary and domain
specific knowledge. The agent groups have access to a
maximum of 100 DTIs in the simulation environment.
Figure 2 represents the appropriation of scientific DTI
across the agent population (maximum 100 DTIs – 10
DTIs, 10 agents in a group). In Figure 2, we can
distinguish how different AC strategies require different
timing to obtain the 100 scientific DTIs.

financial performance for the agents that obtain them.
Figure 3 depicts the distribution of scientific DTIs
across the agent population. We can distinguish how
different AC strategies lead to different timings to
obtain the 100 scientific DTIs.
Knowledge Items Known
AVERAGE of sim runs
SUM of agent group
120

Balanced firm
Managerial firm
Manufacturing firm
Marketing firm
Research firm

100

Knowledge

80

Knowledge Items Known
AVERAGE of sim runs
SUM of agent group
120

Research firm

Managerial firm
Manufacturing firm
Marketing firm

60

Balanced firm
40

Research firm

100

20

Balanced firm

Knowledge

80
0

200

400

600

800

1000

1200

1400

1600

1800

2000

Period

Managerial firm

Marketing firm

Manufacturing firm
Marketing firm

Manufacturing firm

40

0

Balanced firm

Managerial firm

60

Figure 3: Technical DTIs (Longitudinal Report)

Research firm
20

0
0

200

400

600

800

1000

1200

1400

1600

1800

2000

Period

Figure 2: Scientific DTIs (Longitudinal Report)
Insight 2: The five AC strategies – research,
managerial, manufacturing, marketing, and balanced –
lead to distinct results in potential AC, due to the
agents’ knowledge appropriation and knowledge
development behaviors.
Again, SimAC demonstrates results that are consistent
with management theory. Research firms, whose main
intent is focused on scanning new knowledge, are the
first ones to obtain the totality of 100 scientific DTIs,
followed by balanced firms. Managerial, marketing and
manufacturing firms, whose main attempt is not
collecting new knowledge, but maximizing the
processing and exploitation of the available knowledge,
are the slowest in reaching the 100 scientific DTIs.
Specifically they are more than 4 times slower than the
best performers since they obtain the 100 DTIs at
around period 400, while research firms—the best in
class—get them at around period 70. This evidence
leads us to define the second SimAC capability.
Simulation & Modeling Capability 2: SimAC enables
simulating the different AC strategies and their
respective innovation payoffs of potential AC, for
different agent groups.
Simulating Realized AC with SimAC
The second type of DTI is the technical DTI, which in
our scenario corresponds to the realized AC (Zahra and
George, 2002). This kind of DTI is obtained when an
agent gets a scientific DTI plus an encoded and
marketing knowledge item. The agent groups can access
a maximum of 100 DTIs in the simulation environment.
The technical DTIs represent knowledge that is more
structured and easy to exploit, thus leading to superior

Insight 3: The five AC strategies – research,
managerial, manufacturing, marketing, and balanced –
lead to distinct results in realized AC, due to the agents’
knowledge appropriation and knowledge development
behaviors.
The SimAC report shows how research firms are still
the first to obtain the 10 technical DTIs, leveraging their
time advantage in reaching the scientific DTIs, which
are a mandatory requirement to get to the second order
DTIs. In fact, in the real world firms need to develop
general structured knowledge before developing it in
innovative products and services, thus being able to
exploit them. Manufacturing firms, due to their focus on
the impact/learn activities, manage to be first together
with the research firm, despite being the slowest at
obtaining the scientific DTIs. Managerial firms and
balanced firms follow the same curve, but the
managerial firm is slightly faster than the balanced one.
The slowest is the marketing firm, which at the end of
the 2000 run is not able to obtain all the 100 technical
DTIs. This said, we can advance another possibility
offered by SimAC.
Simulation & Modeling Capability 3: SimAC enables
simulating the different AC strategies and their
respective innovation payoffs of realized AC, for
different agent groups.
Simulating Knowledge Storage with SimAC
Another way to measure knowledge outcomes, is
considering in how many “locations” knowledge is
stored. Firms embed innovations into documents,
objects, artifacts, and locations. For example, the same
technical innovation can be contained in a patent, in two
types of products, and in the personal knowledge of the
five engineers. Thus, we can affirm that the same
knowledge is contained into eight knowledge stores.
Knowledge stores allow us to trace the diffusion of
knowledge among diverse agents, which can hold the

same knowledge item in different stores at the same
time. Accordingly, literature has underlined how
knowledge is an asset that can be shared without
implying ownership (Boisot, 1998). For example, while
a physical object is either in one place or in another,
several people can share the exact same knowledge
without affecting its structure or nature.
Knowledge Stores Possessed
AVERAGE of sim runs
SUM of agent group
1200
Manufacturing firm
1000

Managerial firm
Research firm

Knowledge

800

Balanced firm

Marketing firm

600

400

200

0
0

200

400

600

800

1000

1200

1400

1600

1800

2000

Period
Research firm

Managerial firm

Balanced firm

Marketing firm

Manufacturing firm

Figure 4: Scientific DTI Knowledge Stores
Knowledge Stores Possessed
AVERAGE of sim runs
SUM of agent group
1200

Research firm

1000

Knowledge

800

Balanced firm

Managerial firm

600

Manufacturing firm

400
200

Marketing firm

0
0

200

400

600

-200

800

1000

1200

1400

1600

1800

2000

Period
Manufacturing firm

Research firm

Managerial firm

Balanced firm

Marketing firm

Figure 5: Technical DTI Knowledge Stores
Insight 4: The five knowledge AC strategies – research,
managerial, manufacturing, marketing, and balanced –
lead to different knowledge store trajectories, as a result
of the differences in the agents’ knowledge
appropriation and knowledge development behaviors.
SimAC consistently reflects the nature of knowledge by
allowing knowledge stores to be more numerous than
knowledge items. Figure 4 shows the development of
knowledge stores for scientific DTIs among the five
agent groups, while figure 5 shows the development of
knowledge stores for technical DTIs. The vertical axis
shows that the number of knowledge stores is higher
than the DTIs obtained. For example, the manufacturing
firms present around 1100 knowledge stores for
scientific and technical DTIs. Yet, while manufacturing
firms are the fastest at obtaining knowledge stores for
scientific DTIs, they are the second slowest to obtain the
knowledge store for technical DTIs. This confirms that
the skills in knowledge allocation are independent from
knowledge creation, and develop clearly different
outcomes depending on the strategy adopted. This leads
us to the last reflection on the SimAC tool capability.

Simulation & Modeling Capability 4: SimAC enables
simulating the different AC strategies and their
respective innovation payoffs related to knowledge
storage, for different agent groups.
CONCLUSION
SimAC is a powerful tool to conduct virtual experiments
for exploring the effects of different AC strategies on
financial and innovation performance. Being based on
the I-Space framework (Boisot, 1995, 1998), the tool
offers a consistent integration of AC theory with finegrained insights about knowledge evolution in
populations of agents. Processes of knowledge
identification,
acquisition,
transformation
and
exploitation can be observed in detail. In this paper we
displayed only a limited set of the several reports that
the suite SimISpace2 offers. However, the results we
presented in this article already offer opportunities to
develop new research questions that can be addressed
using the SimAC application. For example, in our
simulation we have explored a possible scenario where
an arbitrary set of 50 firms compete. In our new
experiments, we are taking care of simulating
environments with significantly higher number of
competitors. Also, to compare the outcome of basic AC
approaches, this first SimAC simulation models the
competition between four strategies focused on one
single objective (i.e. AG2, AG3, AG4, AG5) and one
strategy that engages in a balanced tradeoff between all
the other possible strategies (i.e. AG1). We are aware
that in real life firm strategies might be more complex
than in our experiments, but our parameterization of
SimISpace2 shows that it is possible to simulate
competitive situations with more diverse and realistic
characteristics, and it is in our future plans providing
analysis of these kinds of environments.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research was supported by the Snider
Entrepreneurial Research Center at the Wharton School
of the University of Pennsylvania, the I-Space Institute,
and Technogel US Inc. The authors would like to thank
Ian MacMillan and Max Boisot for their help in
formulating the theoretical foundations of the SimAC
simulation model.
REFERENCES
Aversa P. 2011. Understanding the Absorptive Capacity
through the Social Learning Cycle, 31 Strategic
Management Society Conference: Miami, USA.
Boisot M. 1995. Information space: A framework for
learning in organizations, institutions and culture.
Thomson Learning Emea.
Boisot M. 1998. Knowledge assets: Securing
competitive advantage in the information economy.
Oxford University Press, USA.
Cohen WM, Levinthal DA. 1990. Absorptive Capacity:

A New Perspective on Learning and Innovation.
Administrative Science Quarterly 35(1): 128-152.
Ihrig M. 2010. Investigating entrepreneurial strategies
via simulation, 24th European Conference on Modelling
and Simulation (ECMS): Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
Ihrig M, Abrahams AS. 2007. Breaking new ground in
simulating
knowledge
management
processes:
SimISpace2, 21st European Conference on Modelling
and Simulation (ECMS): Prague, Czech Republic.
Ihrig M, MacMillan I, Knyphausen-Aufsess Dz, Boisot
M. 2010. Knowledge-based Opportunity Recognition
Strategies: A Simulation Approach, 30° Strategic
Management Society Annual Meeting: Rome.
Jansen JJP, Van den Bosch FAJ, Volberda HW. 2005.
Managing potential and realized absorptive capacity:
How do organizational antecedents matter? Academy of
Management Journal 48(6): 999-1015.
Lane P, Koka B, Pathak S. 2006. The reification of
absorptive capacity: a critical review and rejuvenation
of the construct. The Academy of Management Review
31(4): 833-863.
Lim K. 2009. The many faces of absorptive capacity:
spillovers of copper interconnect technology for
semiconductor chips. Industrial and Corporate Change
18(6): 1249-1284.
Nonaka I. 1994. A Dynamic Theory of Organizational
Knowledge Creation. Organization Science 5(1): 14-37.
Todorova G, Durisin B. 2007. Absorptive capacity:
valuing a reconceptualization. Academy of Management
Review 32(3): 774-786.
Zahra SA, George G. 2002. Absorptive Capacity: A
Review, Reconceptualization, and Extension. Academy
of Management Review 27(2): 185-203.
AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES
PAOLO AVERSA is Post-Doctoral Research Fellow at
the Management Department of the Wharton School,
University of Pennsylvania, and Marie Curie Fellow at
the Cass Business School, London. He holds a Ph.D. in
management at the University of Bologna, an MBA at
the CUOA Foundation (Vicenza), and an MA in
Communication at University of Padova. In 2011 he
was awarded with the 1st Prize for the Best Ph.D. Paper
of the European Academy of Management.
Since 2009 he has worked at the Sol C. Snider
Entrepreneurial Center, Wharton School. His current
research interests are related to firm networks, strategic
peripheries and absorptive capacity. He has been
teaching and tutoring at the University of Pennsylvania,
University of Bologna, and University of Padova.
His e-mail address is paversa@wharton.upenn.edu.
MARTIN IHRIG is President of I-Space Institute, LLC
(USA) and Adjunct Assistant Professor at the Wharton
School of the University of Pennsylvania (USA). He
holds a Master of Business Studies from UCD Michael
Smurfit School of Business (Ireland) and a Doctor of
Business Administration from Technische Universität

Berlin (Germany).
The research initiative he manages at Wharton’s Snider
Entrepreneurial Research Center focuses on the
strategic and entrepreneurial management of
knowledge. In his simulation research, he is studying
entrepreneurial opportunity recognition strategies with
the help of agent-based models.
His e-mail address is ihrig@wharton.upenn.edu.

